This is Birmingham, Alabama. Did you
know that it had such an impressive
skyline? I didn't. I also didn't know
that the city limits looked like this.
Yikes. What is happening here? It's like
they took a normal city boundary,
dropped it, and it shattered. There are
holes cut out of it and seemingly random
little shards strewn across the
landscape. But how did Birmingham get to
be this shape? To answer this, we need
to answer some more fundamental
questions, like how do cities get their
boundaries? You have some cities with
boundaries that make complete sense,
like San Francisco's, which is water on
three sides and a straight line to the
south. But for every rational city
boundary, you have examples like this
one. Or this one here. The award for
craziest boundaries large city category
goes to Houston. What's going on over
here? Well, we'll get to it. The reasons
for these odd boundaries include
suburbanization, municipal finance,
racial segregation, and public
infrastructure. Let's talk about why
cities have boundary issues after the
bike bell.
>> [bell]
>> To understand boundaries, we need to
start at the beginning, the moment a
city is born. This is the process of
municipal incorporation. Here's what you
need to know. Below the level of the US
state are municipalities, primarily
cities and counties. Counties have
governments that provide infrastructure
and services for unincorporated areas,
and cities do the same for incorporated
areas. Counties are typically quite
rural, though they can also include
areas like small towns and even
unincorporated suburbs on the edges of
cities. This is our fertile ground for
where a city could be born. Let's say
that there's a reasonably dense area, at
least for suburban standards, and you
want to incorporate it into a city of
its own. How do you do it? The process
varies by state, but in general, there's
a phase where organizers gather
signatures of people within the proposed
boundary. When they get enough
signatures, a formal process begins at
the state level. Often times, this
proto-city needs to prove that it can
provide services like sewer, water,
roads, and public safety. Then it's
common for residents to vote to
incorporate or not. So now we understand
the basics of incorporation. We know how
cities are formed. But why would an
unincorporated place want to become a
city?
Well, it could be for more local
control. A county government often has
to represent a large area with many
different unincorporated areas of
substantial population. That government
could seem too abstract and disconnected
from that unincorporated place.
Residents could also want more services
than the county can provide and is
willing to tax themselves more to get
it.
They could also want to avoid the
possibility of being absorbed into
another city.
That process is called annexation, our
next major topic.
The process of annexation is somewhat
similar to incorporation, with the same
different rules by state. They typically
require a vote of the people being
annexed. Now, why would a property owner
want to be annexed? Back in the old
days, like the turn of the last century,
residents in unincorporated areas were
eager to be annexed by the nearby big
city. Those big cities often had running
water and sewer systems, something that
rural areas lacked, and annexation
brought the promise of connecting into
those systems. These days, annexation
can be a harder sell. Suburban residents
may be wary of possible higher taxes to
pay for the big city's services, or they
may not want to be associated with that
big city, believing it to be filled with
crime or minorities or whatever.
Or they would feel like they would lose
their neighborhood identity and voice if
they're absorbed into the larger entity.
Now, that's the property owner side of
the story, but why would a city want to
annex new territory? For many cities,
it's an opportunity to expand its tax
base, particularly if they can annex
land meant for commercial and industrial
uses.
Residential development can be less good
for a city's tax base because all
development also needs services, and
residential development needs a lot of
services, like local streets and
schools. Houston is a great example of
this. Their boundaries are so weird
because they annexed commercial
tax-generating uses along those
corridors, as well as a part of the
corridors themselves. The lower-value
residential land is outside of the city
boundaries. The result, though, is a
really gnarly city limits. Research
suggests that the financial benefits of
annexation don't always materialize for
cities. This could be because much of
the annexation happening now is done by
suburban communities, not central
cities. These suburbs are annexing land
destined for future suburban
development. Suburban development just
isn't as lucrative for a city's tax
rolls as something like a more dense
area.
Municipal finance might not even be the
biggest motivation for annexation.
Another study found that cities are
often engaging in annexation to bring
back some of the residents lost due to
suburbanization. The unsaid motivation
was to bring in more white residents to
dilute the power of non-white residents
in the annexing cities. This highlights
the big takeaway for incorporation,
annexation, and weird city boundaries.
It is a political process. That's why we
call them political boundaries. When
people do the deciding, the boundaries
can look really illogical. You might
have noticed that these political
boundaries mirror another kind of odd
political boundaries, US congressional
districts. These are notorious for being
gerrymandered to make them more
democratic or more republican. This sort
of force is at work in municipal
boundaries, too, though not so
explicitly based in national partisan
politics. To illustrate all of this,
let's look back at our Birmingham case
study. Here's what the boundaries of
Birmingham looked like in 1960. It's far
more contained and logical. The major
issue facing the city at the time was
suburbanization. Like many cities in the
postwar years, Birmingham saw residents
moving to single-family houses out in
the suburbs, leaving the city itself
with a stagnant population. This
suburbanization was also white flight,
as white families had the means to buy
houses in the suburbs. Birmingham was
incredibly redlined and segregated,
meaning that black families weren't able
to access credit and buy homes. They had
to forego building generational wealth
that would help them buy houses in the
suburbs.
With wealthier white families leaving,
tax revenues declined. This meant the
city couldn't maintain its
infrastructure and services at a high
level. City leaders saw annexation as a
solution to this problem. If Birmingham
could annex the suburbs, the city could
recapture some of the population and
resources that still existed in the area
just outside of its boundaries.
This is a strategy that many cities
employed at the time. In the south, it
actually helped create more integrated
cities instead of a dynamic of black
cities and white suburbs. In some cases,
cities can merge with counties. This is
what Nashville did with Davidson County.
You can see that only a few pre-existing
cities are outside of Nashville's
boundaries, and those boundaries seem
fairly logical, encompassing most of the
region's population. This,
unfortunately, did not happen in the
Birmingham area. Part of the problem was
that many of the suburban areas had
already incorporated decades ago as
their own cities, more so than in the
Nashville area. The more cities that
exist, the more complicated task a
consolidation effort becomes. The cities
of Homewood and Mountain Brook seriously
considered merging with Birmingham in
the early 1960s. The fate of all three
cities were closely tied, and the
suburban residents of those cities felt
linked to Birmingham. But the sticking
point was schools. In 1963, Alabama
schools had to be integrated. Birmingham
school district boundary had to be the
same as its city boundary. So it meant
that Mountain Brook and Homewood's white
students would have to mix with
Birmingham's black students if they were
consolidated. That was enough to end the
merger. Birmingham leaders were
undeterred, determined to add to its
footprint. If white suburbs wouldn't
join them, they would take a different
approach. They decided to annex land
with nothing on it, area prime for new
development. It included these areas
here. Birmingham leaders annexed this
land through a loophole in annexation
law. They didn't need to get signatures
from the landowners to call an
annexation vote if the city agreed to
provide full public services and forego
tax revenues for 5 to 15 years. Luckily,
underdeveloped rural areas don't need
many services anyway, and the city could
use the tax-free area as an incentive
for new development. This effort largely
succeeded in increasing the city's land
area, but not its population. Birmingham
did have some success in annexing some
smaller unincorporated communities. They
were mostly made up of black residents
who were happy to join up with
Birmingham.
All of this annexation led to some weird
boundaries. Birmingham had to grow
around the existing incorporated
suburbs, hence this weird appendage over
here. This aggressive annexation
strategy did help Birmingham capture
some commercial and economic
development, but the city continues to
shed population. New residential
development is difficult thanks again to
schools. Suburban residents don't want
their kids attending Birmingham's
under-resourced schools with mostly
black students.
Birmingham also had to account for its
suburban neighbors trying their own
boundary shenanigans. Like I said, these
days most of the cities annexing new
land are suburbs themselves.
For example, the city of Vestavia Hills
wanted to annex a proposed new
residential commercial development
called Liberty Park. The problem that it
wasn't contiguous. Vestavia Hills asked
the Alabama legislature to pass a law
making it possible to annex
non-contiguous property, and it agreed.
Birmingham sued, as they had been forced
to make contiguous annexations, but the
court sided with Vestavia Hills.
Vestavia Hills then tried to annex the
space between the two parts of its city,
an unincorporated community called
Cahaba Heights. Nearby Mountain Brook
was also interested in annexing them,
but Vestavia Hills won the battle and
has an almost contiguous city limits. If
you want more information about
Birmingham's fascinating boundary
history, check out the book The Most
Segregated City in America by Charles E.
Connerly. There's so, so much more that
I wanted to include of this narrative in
this video, but you just need to go and
read it for yourself.
While some of the racial politics in
Birmingham might be extreme, it helps
illustrate the point that many of the
weird boundaries we see on maps are
there due to political reasons.
They aren't engineered in any logical
way. There are some non-political
reasons for strange boundaries, though.
One of them is contiguity. As of 1982,
boundaries don't have to be contiguous
in Alabama, but they still do in other
places and can affect any place that had
a historic requirement. It can lead to
strange boundaries where there are
legitimate reasons for having a piece of
land far away from the city center. One
of the most obvious examples is
airports. Airports can be operated by
cities, but it's not usually a good idea
to have them too close to a city center,
particularly if that center has a lot of
tall buildings. You can see here that
Chicago O'Hare Airport is connected to
the city by this little line here.
There's not even a road that connects
the airport to the rest of the city that
runs through that strip. Denver also has
kind of an arm out to its airport, but
it's a beefier arm than Chicago's.
Topography is another reason for weird
boundaries. Sometimes when you stare at
a flat map, it's not obvious that there
are major hills and valleys that are not
suitable for incorporation and
annexation. If you look at my adopted
hometown of San Luis Obispo, looks like
this chunk right here would be perfect
for annexation. It's near a highway and
close to downtown. But here's what it
looks like in real life. It's the start
of like a miniature mountain range and
it will never be developed. Back over in
Birmingham, there's a little bit of both
of these things happening. Let's look at
the strangest appendage to Birmingham
over in its northwest section.
It's a super long tendril connecting
Birmingham to this area right here.
There isn't an airport or landfill or
anything like that, but a port. The port
can actually ship goods from the Locust
Fork of the Black Warrior River down to
the Gulf of Mexico.
This access combined with railroads is
what made Birmingham the Pittsburgh of
the South, shipping steel and other
materials out of Alabama and around the
world. Today, it's a rather underused
port, but it's still contiguous to
Birmingham thanks to this narrow stretch
right here.
Okay, so how should we handle all of
these boundary issues? There's a lot
wrapped up in this from taxes to local
control to issues of race and class.
There are two major strategies for
reducing weird boundaries. The first
answer is one we've already discussed,
so I'll keep it brief, municipal
consolidation. Reducing the number of
local governments in an urban region can
reduce complexity and allow urban areas
to develop regional solutions more
easily. Nashville isn't the only area
that has done it.
Jacksonville, Florida is another
prominent example. The consolidation
actually made the city the largest in
the US by land area.
Finally, California presents another
model for reigning in odd boundaries.
It's called LAFCO or Local Agency
Formation Commission.
Every county in California must have
this regulatory body that oversees the
creation, annexation, and dissolution of
municipalities and special districts.
Before annexing an area, a city must
claim it in its sphere of influence,
which must be approved by a LAFCO. A
sphere of influence is the probable
future area of growth for a city's
boundaries. It's the area the city
thinks it can someday provide municipal
services to, like sewer and water. A
city can only eventually annex land
within its sphere of influence. LAFCOs
can ensure that two municipalities don't
try to annex the same area by approving
spheres of influence and mediating any
disputes. The entire boundary making
process is regulated, which is very on
brand for California. But it's also
needed in places like Los Angeles
County, which has 88 cities within its
boundaries. This map alone could be a
topic for another video. So if you made
it this far in the video, I'm guessing
you have a love of cities. And I want to
throw a recommendation your way. It's
for a series called Beyond the
Bleachers. This is a three-part look at
the differences between North American
and European stadiums. But it's not just
look at the stadium buildings
themselves, but also the location of
stadiums within their respective cities.
It's a really nice lens to be looking at
the differences between American